===== PAGE 1 =====
RPA pilot knowledge requirements
Knowledge requirements for RPA pilots operating in basic or advanced operations are shown in the
following tables. The applicable type of operation (basic and advanced) is shown to the left of the topics.
Sample learning objectives are shown to the right of the topics. The list of sample objectives is not all-
inclusive, its purpose is to illustrate the depth of knowledge required to operate RPAS in Canadian
airspace.
Types of operation (basic operations, advanced operations) are set out in the Canadian Aviation
Regulations, Part IX. There are minimum knowledge requirements for RPA pilots operating in each of
those groups.
Applicants for the pilot certificate – small remotely piloted aircraft (VLOS) – basic operations shall
demonstrate their knowledge by writing the Transport Canada multiple choice examination based on
the indicated applicable subjects contained in this guide.
Applicants for the pilot certificate – remotely piloted aircraft – advanced operations shall demonstrate
their knowledge by writing the Transport Canada multiple choice examination based on the indicated
applicable subjects contained in this guide.
Applicants for the flight reviewer rating attached to the pilot certificate – remotely piloted aircraft –
advanced operations shall demonstrate their knowledge by writing the Transport Canada multiple
choice examination on the indicated applicable subjects contained in the “Knowledge areas” section of
this guide related to advanced operations and the content of “TP15395 Flight Reviewer’s Guide for Pilots
of Remotely Piloted Aircraft 250 g up to and including 150 kg, Operating within Visual Line-of-Sight
(VLOS), Extended Visual Line-of-Sight (EVLOS), Sheltered VLOS, or Level 1 Complex BVLOS” related to
conducting a flight review covering the subjects set out in Standard 921.03.
vii
===== PAGE 2 =====
Knowledge areas
Section 1: air law, air traffic rules and procedures
RPAS Knowledge areas (topics) Sample learning objectives
type of operation The RPA pilot operating within Canada must be
Basic Advanced
able to:
Aeronautics Act
  Section 3 - Definitions  Define aerodrome, airport, and pilot-in-
command.
 Demonstrate a basic understanding of the
Act.
Canadian Aviation Regulations (CARs)
Part IGeneral provisions
101Interpretation
  101.01 Interpretation (definitions)  Define common terms used in the Canadian
Aviation Regulations, such as day, night, VFR.
 State the definition of remotely piloted
aircraft.
 Define Remotely Piloted Aircraft System
(RPAS).
 Define Command and Control (C2) link.
 Define control station.
102Application
  102.01 Application  State that the regulations do not apply to
indoor or underground operations.
103Administration and compliance
  103.02 Inspection of aircraft, requests for production of  State who may demand to inspect aviation
documents and prohibitions documents.
 103.03 Return of Canadian Aviation Documents
8
===== PAGE 3 =====
 103.04 Record keeping  State that computer-stored records may be
used in place of paper records if measures
are taken to protect them.
Part IIIAerodromes and airports
301Aerodromes  Explain that persons, vehicles, obstacles, and
 301.01 Application operations at aerodromes are subject to the
 301.08 Prohibitions approval of the aerodrome operator and the
 301.09 Fire prevention appropriate air traffic control unit.
302Airports  State the restrictions/rules for activities on
 302.10 Prohibitions an aerodrome, or airport.
 302.11 Fire prevention
Part VIGeneral operating and flight rules
601Airspace
Airspace structure, classification and use
 601.01 Airspace structure  Describe the horizontal and vertical limits of
 601.02 Airspace classification the various classifications of airspace, control
 601.03 Transponder airspace areas, special use airspace.
 601.04 IFR or VFR flight in class F special use restricted  Identify the altimeter setting region and the
airspace or class F special use advisory airspace standard pressure region.
 601.08 VFR flight in class C airspace  Recall that operations in Class F restricted
 601.09 VFR flight in class D airspace airspace require the authorisation of the
person specified in the Designated Airspace
Handbook.
 Describe the communications required with
air traffic control (ATC) for operating a RPA
VLOS within controlled airspace.
Aircraft operating restrictions and hazards to aviation safety
9
===== PAGE 4 =====
  601.14 Interpretation  Recall the restrictions to aircraft (and all RPA)
  601.15 Forest fire aircraft operating restrictions operations in the vicinity of forest fire areas.
 601.16 Issuance of NOTAM for forest fire  Describe the circumstances when an RPA is
  601.17 Exceptions permitted to be operated in the vicinity of a
  601.20 Projection of directed bright light source at an aircraft forest fire area.
  601.21 Requirement for notification
  601.22 Requirement for Pilot-In-Command (PIC)
602 – Operating and flight rules - general
Operation at or in the vicinity of an aerodrome
 602.96 General  Recall the minimum operating conditions for
 602.97 VFR and IFR aircraft operations at uncontrolled traditional aircraft VFR flight in uncontrolled
aerodromes within a Mandatory Frequency (MF) Area airspace.
 602.98 General MF reporting requirements
 602.99 MF reporting procedures before entering maneuvering
area
 602.100 MF reporting procedures on departure
 602.101 MF reporting procedures on arrival
 602.102 MF reporting procedures when flying continuous
circuits
 602.103 Reporting procedures when flying through an MF
area
Radio communications
 602.136 Continuous listening watch  Describe the actions to be taken by
 602.138 Two-way radio communication failure in VFR flight traditional aircraft in the event of a two-way
 602.146 The Emergency Security Control of Air Traffic radio communication failure when flying in
(ESCAT)Plan class C or D airspace.
10
===== PAGE 5 =====
606Miscellaneous
  606.01 Munitions of war  Recall that weapons may not be carried on
RPA unless authorized.
Part IX Remotely piloted aircraft systems
Division I General provisions
  900.01 Interpretation  Define common terms used in RPAS
operations such as: payload, visual observer,
visual line of sight (VLOS) operations,
sheltered operation, extended visual line of
sight (EVLOS) operations, operating weight,
small remotely piloted aircraft, medium
remotely piloted aircraft, etc.
  900.02 Application
900.03 Reserved
900.04 Reserved
900.05 Reserved
Division II General operating and flight rules for all RPAS
  900.06 Reckless or negligent operation  Recall that these provisions apply to RPA of
  900.07 Inadvertent Entry into Restricted Airspace any size, including those with operating
  900.08 Prohibition — Emergency Security Perimeter weight of less than 250 g.
  900.09 Prohibition — Commercial Air Service  Recall the prohibition against endangering
aviation safety or the safety of any person.
 Recall notification requirements when a loss
of control of an RPA has occurred or is likely
to occur.
 Recall prohibitions related to operations
over or within emergency security
perimeters.
 Recall prohibitions related to commercial air
11
===== PAGE 6 =====
services.
900.10 Reserved
900.11 Reserved
900.12 Reserved
Division III Registration of remotely piloted aircraft
  900.13 Registration  Recall that all RPA are required to display the
  900.14 Registration number registration number.
  900.15 Qualifications to be registered owner of a remotely  Recall that the RPA pilot must have easy
piloted aircraft access to the certificate of registration when
  900.16 Registration requirements operating a registered RPA.
  900.17 Register of remotely piloted aircraft
  900.18 Cancellation of certificate of registration
  900.19 Change of name or address
  900.20 Access to certificate of registration
Subpart 1 Small remotely piloted aircraft and medium
remotely piloted aircraft
Division I General provisions
  901.01 Application  State that RPA having an operating weight
less than 250 g are not subject to the rules in
Part IX Subpart 1 of the Canadian Aviation
Regulations.
901.02 Reserved
901.03 Reserved
901.04 Reserved
901.05 Reserved
901.06 Reserved
12
===== PAGE 7 =====
901.07 Reserved
901.08 Reserved
901.09 Reserved
901.10 Reserved
In VLOS
  901.11 Visual line-of-sight  Recall that RPA shall give way to traditional
  901.12 Reserved aircraft at all times.
  901.13 Prohibition—Canadian domestic airspace  Recall the rules regarding the use of visual
  901.14 Controlled airspace observers.
  901.15 Inadvertent entry into controlled airspace  State what aeronautical information must be
  901.16 Flight safety consulted before flight.
  901.17 Right of way  State that an RPA must remain in Canadian
  901.18 Avoidance of collision domestic airspace unless the operation is
  901.19 Fitness of crew members conducted in accordance with an SFOC —
  901.20 Visual observers RPAS.
  901.21 Compliance with instructions  Recall the requirement to notify air traffic
  901.22 Carriage of persons control if a flyaway is likely to enter
  901.23 Procedures controlled airspace.
  901.24 Pre-flight information  State which procedures must be established
  901.25 Maximum altitude for normal and emergency operations for all
  901.26 Horizontal distance RPA operations.
  901.27 Site survey  State the minimum distance that an RPA
  901.28 Other pre-flight requirements must remain from another person not
involved in the operation.
  901.29 Serviceability of the remotely piloted aircraft system
 State the minimum visibility required for the
  901.30 Availability of manuals
operation of an RPA.
  901.31 Instructions and manuals
 Recall that an RPA may not be operated at or
  901.32 Control of remotely piloted aircraft systems
near an aerodrome in a manner that could
  901.33 Take-offs, launches, approaches, landings and recovery
interfere with aircraft operating in the
  901.34 Minimum weather conditions
13
===== PAGE 8 =====
  901.35 Icing established traffic pattern.
  901.36 Formation flight  State the minimum distance that an RPA
  901.37 Prohibition—operation of moving vehicles, vessels and must remain from an airport and from a
traditional aircraft heliport when operating under the basic
  901.38 Use of first-person view devices operations rules.
  901.39 Night flight requirements  Describe the factors that must be included in
  901.40 Multiple remotely piloted aircraft a “site survey” for all RPA operations.
  901.41 Special aviation events and advertised events  State the requirements for position lights
  901.42 Handovers when operating an RPA at night.
  901.43 Payloads
  901.44 Flight termination system
  901.45 ELT
  901.46 Transponder and automatic pressure-altitude
reporting equipment
  901.47 Operations at or in the vicinity of an aerodrome,
airport or heliport
  901.48 Records
  901.49 Incidents and accidents—associated measures
  901.50 Dropping of Objects
901.51 Reserved
901.52 Reserved
Division IV Basic operations
  901.53 Application  State the requirements to apply for a pilot
  901.54 Pilot requirements certificate – small remotely piloted aircraft
  901.55 Issuance of pilot certificate—small remotely piloted (VLOS) – basic operations.
aircraft (VLOS)—basic operations  State what is required to operate a small RPA
  901.56 Recency requirements in basic operations.
  901.57 Access to certificate and proof of recency  Recall the 24-month recency requirements
  901.58 Examination rules for holders of pilot certificates - RPA (VLOS).
14
===== PAGE 9 =====
  901.59 Retaking of an examination or a flight review
901.60 Reserved
901.61 Reserved
Division V Advanced operations
 901.62 Application  State the requirements to apply for a pilot
 901.63 Pilot requirements certificate – RPA – advanced operations.
 901.64 Issuance of pilot certificate—remotely piloted  State what is required to operate an RPA in
aircraft—advanced operations advanced operations.
 901.65 Recency requirements  Recall the 24-month recency requirements
 901.66 Access to certificate and proof of recency for holders of pilot certificate – RPA –
 901.67 Examination rules advanced operations.
 901.68 Retaking of an examination or a flight review  State the conditions under which it is
 901.69 Declaration—permitted operations permissible to operate an RPA at a lateral
 901.70 Operation of a modified remotely piloted aircraft distance of less than 100 feet from another
system person not involved in the operation.
 901.71 Operations in controlled airspace  State the information that must be given to
 901.72 Compliance with air traffic control instructions air traffic services when requesting flight in
 901.73 Operations at or in the vicinity of an airport or a controlled airspace.
heliport–established procedure  State requirements to conduct operations
 901.74 Extended VLOS Operations and Sheltered Operations within an airport or heliport environment.
 901.75 Visual Observers  State the conditions under which it is
permissible to conduct extended VLOS
operations or sheltered operations.
 State visual observer (VO) requirements for
extended VLOS operations.
901.76 Reserved
901.77 Reserved
901.78 Reserved
15
===== PAGE 10 =====
901.79 Reserved
901.80 Reserved
901.81 Reserved
901.82 Reserved
901.83 Reserved
901.84 Reserved
901.85 Reserved
901.86 Reserved
Division X Training and Flight Review
 901.175 Prohibition—flight reviewer  State that a flight reviewer rating is
required in order to conduct a flight review
for a pilot certificate – RPA – advanced
operations.
 901.176 Flight reviewer rating
 901.177 Examination rules
 901.178 Retaking of an examination
 901.179 Eligibility to Make Declaration
 901.180 Training provider requirements – Flight Reviews
 901.181 Conduct of flight reviews
Subpart 2 Reserved
Subpart 3 Special flight operations—remotely piloted aircraft
systems
 903.01 Prohibition  Give examples of types of RPAS operations
that would require a special flight operations
certificate (SFOC) — RPAS.
 903.02 Application for special flight operations certificate—
RPAS
 903.03 Issuance [or Amendment] of special flight operations
16
===== PAGE 11 =====
certificate—RPAS
  Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB)(refer to TC  State that the purpose of aircraft accident
AIM-GEN 3.0) investigation is to prevent recurrence.
 State the types of RPA accidents that must
be reported to the Transportation Safety
Board of Canada.
Air traffic services and procedures
 Air traffic and advisory services  Determine who provides coordination or air
traffic control service for the airspace being
used (if applicable).
 Determine the Mandatory Frequency
(MF)/Aerodrome Traffic Frequency (ATF) and
enroute frequencies (if applicable) for the
operating area.
 Explain any traffic patterns of passing
traditional aircraft.
 Anticipate patterns of traditional aircraft
sharing the airspace.
 Determine the aeronautical radio
frequencies in use for this airspace.
 Use appropriate phraseology in radio
communication.
 Recognize clearances and instructions
directed to traditional aircraft.
 Interpret the Canada Flight Supplement (CFS)
with respect to aerodrome airspace and
location procedures.
 Communicate/interface with NAV CANADA
according to their “Best Practices”
17
===== PAGE 12 =====
documents.
 Determine how to conduct RPA operations at
controlled and uncontrolled aerodromes.
  Flight service stations, flight information centres
 Communication procedures
 ATC clearances/instructions/mandatory read back procedures
 Aerodrome operations  controlled
 Aerodrome operations  uncontrolled
 Mandatory frequency (MF) and aerodrome traffic frequency
(ATF)
18
===== PAGE 13 =====
Section 2: RPA airframes, power plants, propulsion and systems
RPAS Knowledge areas (topics) Sample learning objectives
type of operation The RPA pilot operating within Canada must be
Basic Advanced
able to:
Airframes
  1. Handling/care/securing  Indicate how RPAS manufacturers identify the
repairs and work that can be undertaken by
the owner vs. what must be addressed by an
authorized repair facility (e.g., how to find
your applicable original equipment
manufacturer guidelines).
 Describe the importance of identifying
propeller/rotor damage, surface
contamination, wiring damage, structural
damage.
 Identify the parts of an airframe.
Electrical systems
  1. Typical electrical system components (motors, electronic  Describe typical electrical system
speed controllers, batteries, etc.) components.
  2. Servo motors  Describe the actions of a servo.
  3. Importance of component integrity/maintenance  Describe the indications of a failed servo.
 Explain the importance of keeping
components dry.
Redundancies & critical items
  1. Risks of flying with inoperative systems  State the value of redundancy in operating
scenarios.
Control station
  1. Orientation  State the importance of pilot and antenna
19
===== PAGE 14 =====
  2. Software version control orientations in reference to the RPA.
  3. Flight simulation
Data links
  1. Frequency bands (licensed and unlicensed)  Describe how to assess the Radio Frequency
  2. Line-of-sight (RF) environment or conduct and RF sweep.
  3. Antenna and tracking systems  Discuss the importance of radio line-of-sight.
  4. Interference  Discuss the importance of Ground Control
  5. Gain, signal to noise ratio Station (GCS) antenna placement.
 Discuss the causes of lost link and methods of
recovery.
Batteries
  1. Types and hazards  Interpret maintenance log history.
  2. Battery parameters such as Energy Capacity (measured in  Describe the variables affecting batteries
Ah and Wh), Voltage(V), charge and discharge rates (C-Rating) (capacity e.g., due to age, history, charge
  3. Battery configurations (parallel, series) status).
  4. Charge cycles, storage, and maintenance  Assess battery voltages (understand discharge
  5. Discharge curves curves).
  6. Transportation of batteries in accordance with the  Describe the regulations applicable to taking
Transportation of Dangerous Goods Regulations (TDG) lithium-ion batteries on board a commercial
Regulations flight.
 Describe the dangers of using water on
lithium battery fires.
Fuel systems
  1. Fuel system types and hazards.  Describe different fuel systems in RPA.
  2. Fuel quantity measurement.  Describes hazards of different fuels.
  3. Fueling and storage techniques.  Describe methods to assess fuel quantity and
consumption under different flight conditions.
 Describe safe fuel storage, handling and
20
===== PAGE 15 =====
grounding/bonding techniques.
Autopilots
  1. The role of an autopilot  Describe the types of pilot intervention
  2. Different levels of control (e.g., stabilization vs. waypoint) possible during flight.
  3. Flight termination systems (internal and remote)  Describe the pre-flight preparation related to
  4. Software version control (control station and RPA) flight termination systems.
 Discuss the possible consequences of
improper software version control.
 Describe the importance of updating verified
firmware only from trusted sources.
Payloads
  1. Sensor types (electro-optical, infra-red, radio frequency,  Define what comprises the payload vs. the
atmospheric, etc.) rest of the system.
Propulsion
  1. Types of electric motors (brush, brushless, inrunner, and  Describe the characteristics of different motor
outrunner) types.
  2. Speed controllers  Describe 2-stroke and 4-stroke engines.
  3. Types of internal combustion engines  Explain aircraft behavior following a
propulsion system failure.
Launch and recovery systems
  1. Types of launchers  Identify the different danger areas of a safety
  2. Types of recovery systems–parachute, deep stall, arresting template.
system/hook, normal landing  Describe different methods of recovering an
  3. Safety areas and templates for launch and recovery RPA.
Maintenance and record keeping
21
===== PAGE 16 =====
  1. Technical log requirements  List the requirements for record-keeping.
 Give examples of tasks that should be
independently verified.
  2. Servicing, elementary tasks, critical tasks
  3. 2-person perform/verify practice
Magnetic compass
  1. Principles of operation  Explain the difference between magnetic and
  2. Variation true north.
  3. Factors adversely affecting compass operation  Explain what can affect compass operation
  4. Importance of calibration and reliability.
Altimeter
  1. Principles of operation  Explain the purpose of a barometric altimeter
  2. Errors and malfunctions setting.
 Describe the effect of a blocked static system.
 Describe the difference between GPS altitude
and barometric altitude.
 Describe how to convert GPS altitude to above
sea level (ASL).
Airspeed indicator
  1. Principles of operation  Describe the difference between indicated
  2. Errors and malfunctions and true airspeeds.
 Describe the effect of a blocked pitot system.
Inertial measurement unit (IMU)
  1. Components  Describe what the IMU responsible for.
  2. Errors & malfunctions  Give examples of what can cause the IMU to
misbehave.
22
===== PAGE 17 =====
Section 3: Human factors
RPAS Knowledge areas (topics) Sample learning objectives
type of operation The RPA pilot operating within Canada must be able to:
Basic Advanced
Aviation physiology
  1. Vision/visual scanning techniques  Describe good scanning techniques (visual, audio)
  2. Hearing for visual observers (conflicting aircraft).
  3. Orientation/disorientation (including  Describe “perspective illusion” when looking at
visual/perspective/parallax illusions) distant aircraft.
  4. Body rhythms/jet lag  Describe factors that affect alertness.
  5. Sleep/fatigue
  6. Anaesthetics
The pilot and the operating environment
  1. Medications (prescribed and over-the-counter)  Describe the effects of medications and other
  2. Substance abuse (alcohol/drugs) substances on pilot performance, including lasting
  3. Heat/cold effects beyond initial impairment.
  4. Noise  Describe the effects of exposure to cold and
  5. Toxic hazards (including carbon monoxide – GCS excessive heat on pilot performance.
vehicle)  Describe the symptoms of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
Aviation psychology
  1. Factors that influence  List factors that interfere with effective decision-
decision-making making.
  2. Situational awareness  List the factors that affect situational awareness.
  3. Stress  Describe how a given operational risk might be
  4. Managing risk managed.
  5. Attitudes
  6. Workloadattention and information processing
23
===== PAGE 18 =====
Pilotequipment/materials relationship
  1. Controls and displayserrors in interpretation and  Explain the benefits of standard operating
control procedures and considering lessons learned from
  2. Standard operating proceduresrationale/benefits operating experience.
  3. Correct use of checklists and manuals  Explain how to manage an interruption to a
  4. Automation and complacency checklist.
Interpersonal relations
  1. Communications with flight crew/air traffic  Resolve differences peacefully.
services/customers/public/authorities  Promote open communications.
  2. Operating pressuresfamily relationships/peer  Place safety requirements over hierarchy/position in
group organization/politics.
  3. Operating pressuresemployer
24
===== PAGE 19 =====
Section 4: Meteorology
RPAS Knowledge areas (topics) Sample learning objectives
type of operation The RPA pilot operating within Canada must be able to:
Basic Advanced
The earth’s atmosphere
 1. Composition and physical properties  Describe the chemical composition of the
  2. Density and pressure atmosphere.
Atmospheric pressure
 1. Pressure measurements  Define atmospheric pressure, station pressure, sea
 2. Station pressure level pressure.
 3. Sea level pressure  Explain how atmospheric pressure varies with
 4. Pressure system and their variations height.
 5. Effects of temperature  Explain the movement of air resulting from high- and
low-pressure systems, convergence, and divergence.
 Relate weather characteristics to pressure systems.
Meteorological aspects of altimetry
 1. Pressure altitude  Recall the factors that affect density altitude.
 2. Density altitude  Assess weather and density altitude for anticipated
 3. Altimeter settings performance (take-off and launch) and flight
envelope limitations.
Moisture
 1. Temperature variations with altitude  Explain the relationship between lapse rate,
 2. Relative humidity/dewpoint temperature-dewpoint spread and cloud base.
 3. Cloud formation  Explain the effect of moisture and temperature on
 4. Precipitation the formation of clouds, height of cloud base.
 Discuss the significance of cloud base height on
potential air traffic.
25
===== PAGE 20 =====
Stability and instability
 1. Characteristics of stable/unstable air  Characterize the effects of stable and unstable air
 2. Surface heating/cooling masses (visibility, turbulence, and smog layers).
 3. Lifting processes
Clouds
  1. Types applicable to low level flying and recognition  Identify cloud types and their impact on flying
  2. Associated precipitation and turbulence operations.
 Discuss the significance of observed vertical cloud
development.
Surface based layers
  1. Fog formation  Explain how fog is formed.
  2. Haze/smoke  Identify the elements that can dissipate fog.
  3. Blowing obstruction to vision  Identify different obstructions to vision.
Turbulence
  1. Convection  Explain the sources of mechanical turbulence.
  2. Mechanical  Describe the formation of turbulence around large
  3. Orographic objects and mountain tops.
  4. Wind shear  Identify sources of micro-climate turbulence and
wind shear.
Wind
  1. Pressure gradient  Explain the effect of pressure gradient on the
  2. Low level windsvariation in surface wind horizontal movement of air.
  3. Friction  Explain how wind changes in the friction layer due to
  4. Diurnal effects surface heating.
  5. Land/sea breezes  Define wind shear and its effect on turbulence.
  6. Katabatic/anabatic effects  Explain the formation of land/sea breezes.
  7. Topographical effects  Use a picture to explain anabatic and katabatic
26
===== PAGE 21 =====
winds.
 Explain the effects of urban airflow.
Fronts and frontal weather
 1. Structure/frontal wave  Discuss the relationship between air masses and
 2. Cold front creation of weather fronts.
 3. Warm front  Describe the changes in weather as a front
approaches and passes over your location.
Aircraft icing
  1. Formation  Explain how icing is formed and the conditions that
  2. In-flightfreezing rain cause it.
  3. Hoar frost  Recognize weather conditions that can cause surface
  4. Effect of frost and ice on launch and recovery contamination.
systems  Describe the components of an RPA that are
susceptible to icing.
Thunderstorms
 1. Requirements for development  Describe the three stages of thunderstorm
 2. Typesair mass/frontal development.
 3. Hazardsupdrafts/downdrafts/gust  Describe the surface weather characteristics of an
fronts/downbursts/microbursts/hail/lightning/antennas approaching thunderstorm.
 4. Squall lines  Identify hazards likely to occur with thunderstorm
activity.
Meteorological services available to pilots
 1. Flight Information Centres (FIC) – telephone service  Identify the sources for local weather information.
  2. Aviation weather web site  Describe the differences in cloud base and wind
 3. Automatic Terminal Information Service (ATIS) forecasts between aviation and non-aviation
  4. Non-aviation sources sources.
27
===== PAGE 22 =====
Aviation weather reports
 1. Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR),  Compare reported weather with the regulatory
Automated Weather Observation Station (AWOS), Basic requirements.
Weather Information System (LWIS)  Demonstrate awareness of coded weather
information and identify methods of decoding.
 Identify sources of weather reports (websites etc.).
Aviation forecasts
 1. Times issued and validity periods  Compare forecast weather with the regulatory
 2. Aerodrome Forecasts (TAF) requirements.
 Assess forecast ceiling, wind, turbulence,
precipitation, and visibility against operational
objectives.
 Assess forecast vs. control station requirements
(e.g., lightning).
28
===== PAGE 23 =====
Section 5: Navigation
RPAS Knowledge areas (topics) Sample learning objectives
type of operation The RPA pilot operating within Canada must be able to:
Basic Advanced
Definitions
  1. Longitude  Demonstrate operational understanding of these
  2. Latitude definitions.
 3. Variation
 4. Track
 5. Heading
 6. Airspeed
 7. Bearing
 8. Wind velocity
 9. Drift
Maps and charts
  1. Aeronautical charts: VNC, VTA  Locate your position on an aeronautical chart.
  2. Topographical symbols  Interpret topographical information from charts.
  3. Elevation and contours (relief)  Determine your distance from the nearest
  4. Aeronautical information aerodrome.
  5. Scale and units of measurement  Identify a control zone on an aeronautical chart.
  6. Locating position by latitude and longitude  Determine the validity/currency of aeronautical
  7. Canada Flight Supplement (CFS) charts.
 Use the CFS or other approved publication to
identify airport operators and air traffic control
agencies.
Time and longitude
  1. 24 Hour system  Convert UTC to local time & vice versa.
  2. Conversion of Universal Coordinated Time (UTC) to  Determine local time of sunrise/sunset.
local and vice versa
29
===== PAGE 24 =====
  3. Sunrise and sunset
Pilot navigation
  1. Use of aeronautical charts  Describe location and activities referring to
 2. Measurement of bearing and distance appropriate aeronautical charts and aeronautical
 3. Variation reference points.
 4. True track/magnetic track  Identify the class of airspace and proximity of
 5. True/magnetic/headings aerodromes to the operating location using
 6. Airspeed vs groundspeed aeronautical charts.
 Explain the difference between true and magnetic
heading.
Flight planning
  1. Factors affecting choice of flying area  Describe the factors that will influence your choice
  2. NOTAM of flying area (restricted airspace, property lines,
  3. Use of Canada Flight Supplement (CFS) requirement for an SFOC — RPAS, etc.).
  4. Fuel/energy requirements  State where to obtain NOTAMs.
  5. Weight and balance  Obtain NOTAMs, including GPS NOTAMs, and
  6. Documents to be available to crew members interpret them.
  7. Aircraft serviceability, configuration  Demonstrate how to use the CFS to determine type
  8. Effect of wind on range and endurance and radius of airspace, frequencies, aerodrome
operator contact information, nearest Flight
Information Centre (FIC)/Air Traffic Service (ATS) unit
for emergency contact, etc.
 Determine the contact information for Emergency
Services and local authorities.
 List the documents that must be available to crew
members.
 Determine the serviceability of
o Aircraft
o Control station
30
===== PAGE 25 =====
o Radio frequency (RF) equipment
o Launch and recovery equipment
o Software loads and versions
o Correct databases (e.g., maps) loaded
o Batteries (capacity (i.e., due to age) history,
charge status, demand due to weight)
 Demonstrate how to verify the flight plan data file is
correct and complete in the autopilot.
Radio theory
  1. Characteristics of low/high and very & ultra-high  Explain the characteristics of radio wave
frequency radio waves propagation.
  2. Frequency bands used in navigation and  Describe the factors that affect radio reception
communication range.
  3. Operational limitations, propagation, causes of  Identify sources of RF interference.
interference  Describe how to assess an RF environment.
 Explain the function of RF spectrum analyzer.
Global navigation satellite system (GNSS/GPS)
 1. Principles of operation  Describe how GNSS systems may be enhanced by
 2. Causes of signal loss and interference augmentation systems.
 Provide an example of how Differential Global
Positioning Service (DGPS) might be used for landing.
 Discuss the significance of GPS loss in flight.
 Describe what can affect GPS performance (number
of satellites, weather).
Other radio and radar aidsbasic principles and use
 1. Air traffic control (ATC) transponder  Describe the function of an ATC radar transponder.
 2. Locator devices
31
===== PAGE 26 =====
Section 6: Flight operations
RPAS Knowledge areas (topics) Sample learning objectives
type of operation The RPA pilot operating within Canada must be able to:
Basic Advanced
General
  1. Pilot-in-command responsibilities  Describe the hazards that can occur in different
  2. Aircraft defects geographic or topographical areas.
  3. Winter operations  Describe the normal flow of traditional aircraft
  4. Thunderstorm avoidance traffic at an aerodrome (circuit, taxiing, etc.).
  5. Wildlife hazards  Explain how local and portable devices might be
  6. Wildlife conservation controlled to reduce interference.
  7. Collision avoidanceuse of lights
 8. Runway numbering
 9. Aerodrome operations (Procedures for the
prevention of runway incursions and conflicts)
  10. Radio/electronic interference, portable electronic
devices
Aircraft performance
  1. Effects of density altitude and humidity  Describe the effect of density altitude on launch and
  2. Bank/speed vs rate/radius of turn climb performance.
  3. Use of aircraft flight manual  Describe the effect of airspeed on radius of turn.
 Determine operating limitations from the aircraft
flight manual.
Performance charts/data
  1. Factors affecting launcher performance (e.g., ice,  Describe the effect of temperature on elasticized
temperature) cord launchers, pneumatic launchers or hydraulic
  2. Crosswind limits launchers.
  3. Factors affecting performance (battery, wind,  Identify crosswind limits.
speeds, climb power, etc.)
32
===== PAGE 27 =====
  4. Hover ceiling, maximum altitude  Using aircraft performance data, determine the
maximum altitude at which an RPA can hover.
Weight and balance
  1. Locating centre of gravity (C of G)  Describe methods of determining C of G.
  2. Weightse.g., empty/gross  Describe how to return a C of G to within limits.
  3. External loads–effect on performance and stability
Aircraft critical surface contamination
  1. Effects of aircraft critical surface contamination on  Describe the effects of surface contamination on
performance airfoils.
  2. Types of contaminants (e.g., water, frost, snow,
condensation, tape, etc.)
RPAS operations (VLOS)
  1. Landowner authorizations  Identify typical functional areas in a VLOS site (e.g.,
  2. Coordination with public safety (municipality) launch, observer).
  3. Charging areas  Identify desirable characteristics of alternate
  4. Site control, safety perimeter recovery areas.
  5. Launch points, recovery points  Identify the requirements of visual observer
  6. Obstacles locations.
  7. Emergency procedures  Identify and evaluate access routes for both normal
  8. Defining roles and responsibilities and emergency operations.
  9. Communications  Assess public access and determine crowd control
  10. Post flight actions (download data, safety actions, requirements.
etc.)  List typical emergency contacts appropriate to flying
site (flyaways, EMS etc.).
 List the safety equipment necessary for the
operation (fire extinguisher, first aid, etc.).
 List the typical items in a crew briefing.
 Describe emergency procedures (e.g., airspace
33
===== PAGE 28 =====
conflicts, system faults, lost link, and public
interference).
 List the typical items in a crew briefing (roles,
objective & plan, timeline, performance limitations,
emergency procedures, airspace conflicts and
escape manoeuvres, flyaways, public interference,
recovery area, interface with the client and public,
site manager, safe areas, expectations of what they
will observe, electro-magnetic interference, sterile
flight deck (no interference or distractions).
 Communicate vital actions (countdown and launch
command, emergency abort, transfer of control, air
traffic contacts, progress and expected
manoeuvres).
 List recommended post-flight actions (download
data, check for damage, clean and dry as needed,
remove batteries, record information into logs,
disassemble and pack per system manual, etc.).
RPAS Operations (Extended VLOS - EVLOS)
 1. Where EVLOS is permitted  Identify that EVLOS is permitted in uncontrolled
 2. Maximum range from pilot and visual observer (VO) airspace away from aerodromes.
 3. Proximity to people  Identify that EVLOS operations must be conducted more
 4. Types of RPA appropriate for EVLOS than 100 feet from people not involved in the operation.
 Identify that EVLOS operations must remain within 2
nautical miles of the pilot and visual observer.
 Identify that the VO should be positioned in a quiet area
with an unobstructed view of the sky.
 Identify that the pilot and VO must have a means of
communication.
 Identify that EVLOS is only permitted with small RPA.
 Identify that EVLOS operations puts additional stress on
34
===== PAGE 29 =====
C2 Links.
 Identify that aircraft endurance is a key consideration
when performing EVLOS operations.
RPAS Operations (Sheltered Operations)
 1. Where sheltered operations are permitted  Identify that sheltered operations can take place in
 2. Maximum range from pilot controlled and uncontrolled airspace.
 3. Proximity to people  Identify what constitutes an obstacle.
 4. Concerns related to C2 links during sheltered  Identify that sheltered operations in controlled airspace
need airspace authorization.
operations
 Identify that RPA performing sheltered operations in
 5. Concerns related to lost-link behavior when
controlled airspace needs a Safety Assurance Declaration
performing sheltered operations.
against CAR Standard 922.04
 Identify that structures like buildings will have an impact
on C2 link performance.
 Identify the importance of correctly programming lost
link behaviour and return to home (RTH) altitude when
performing Sheltered operations.
 Identify that people not involved with the operation
must be more than 100 feet from the RPA at all times
during a sheltered operation.
Occupational safety & health
  1. Charging areas  List the safety equipment necessary for the
  2. Launch points, recovery points operation (fire extinguishers, first aid kit, etc.).
  3. Obstacles  Assess weather threats in relation to ground control
  4. Emergency procedures station (GCS) operations.
  5. Responsibilities  Identify and evaluate access routes.
  6. Communications  List typical emergency contacts appropriate to flying
  7. Post-flight actions site (flyaways, EMS etc.)
 Identify legal site access issues (trespass, insurance,
35
===== PAGE 30 =====
permissions, safety training).
 List typical personal safety equipment.
 Describe the hazards of launchers and recovery
systems.
36
===== PAGE 31 =====
Section 7: Theory of flight
RPAS Knowledge areas (topics) Sample learning objectives
type of operation The RPA pilot operating within Canada must be able to:
Basic Advanced
Principles of flight
  1. Bernoulli's principle  Describe how lift is produced.
  2. Newton's laws
Aircraft parts and components
  1. Fixed wing  Explain the function of the vertical fin.
  2. Multi-rotor aircraft  Identify basic components including lifting and
  3. Helicopter components stabilizing components.
Forces acting on an aircraft
  1. Lift  Identify the 4 forces acting on an aircraft in flight.
  2. Draginduced/parasite  Describe how the 4 forces are balanced during
  3. Thrust manoeuvres and steady flight.
  4. Weight
  5. Equilibrium
Stability
  1. Longitudinal, lateral, directional stability  Explain how the centre of gravity affects longitudinal
  2. Inherent stability stability.
  3. Methods of achieving stability, effect of C of G
position
Aerofoils
  1. Relative airflow and angle of attack  Explain how lift is controlled.
  2. Relationship of lift and drag to angle of attack
  3. Aerodynamic stall
37
===== PAGE 32 =====
Propellers & rotors
  1. Handling and care  Describe how the condition of the propeller/rotor
affects performance.
Design of the wing
  1. Wing planform  Describe how the design of the wing affects
  2. Spoilers performance.
  3. Flaps
Aeroplane flight controls
  1. Aeroplane axes and planes of movement  Describe the function of different control surfaces.
  2. Control surfaces  Explain the function of trim.
  3. Trim
Helicopter flight controls
  1. Cyclic  Describe how lift is created with a rotary wing
  2. Collective (powered and autorotation).
  3. Tail rotor  Describe how lift is controlled.
 Describe the function of the tail rotor, counter-
rotating rotors.
Multi-rotor aircraft dynamics
  1. Principles of flight and torque  Describe how yaw, pitch, roll, and climb are
  2. Pilot flight controls achieved in a multi-rotor aircraft.
  3. Settling with power  Describe how to avoid dynamic rollover in a
  4. Recirculation crosswind.
  5. Dynamic rollover  Describe typical multi-rotor autopilot modes
(manual, attitude, GPS Position hold).
 Describe how asymmetric recirculation can upset
lateral control of a rotorcraft.
38
===== PAGE 33 =====
Load factor
  1. Load factorturns  Describe what can affect the load factor on an
  2. Gust loads, turbulence aircraft.
  3. Structural/power limitations  Recall that increasing the load factor produces a
requirement for increased lift, thus producing
increased drag.
39
===== PAGE 34 =====
Section 8: Radiotelephony
RPAS Knowledge areas (topics) Sample learning objectives
type of operation The RPA pilot operating within Canada must be able to:
Basic Advanced
Communications
 1. Operator’s certificate (aeronautical) - (Industry  Interpret aeronautical radio communications
Canada Operator Certificate – with Aeronautical (position, phase of flight).
Qualification course)  Communicate using standard radio terminology.
 2. Terminology  Give an example of a routine blind broadcast.
 3. Common frequencies  List the contents of a routine call to ATC.
 4. Emergencies  Give an example of an emergency (flyaway)
broadcast.
 Distinguish between “height” and “altitude” in
communications.
 Give examples of proper radio etiquette, including
practices to avoid interfering with other
communications.
Crew member radios
  1. Terminology  Give an example of an advisory describing a possible
  2. Reception performance aircraft conflict.
 Describe factors affecting radio reception range.
 Describe the verbal communication elements in a
positive transfer of control or visual following.
40
